Add documentation for automatic host user creation (#13056)
gravitational/teleport: docs/pages/server-access/guides/host-user-creation.mdx

---
title: Configure Teleport to Create Host Users
description: How to configure Teleport to automatically create transient host users.
---

Teleport's SSH Service can be configured to automatically create local Unix users
upon login.

Host users created by Teleport are transient and will be deleted at the end of an SSH
session. This feature has overlap with the [PAM](./ssh-pam.mdx) integration, however
it provides some additional convenience of not having to manually configure a PAM
script to create and delete users.

It also has benefits over manually creating users as it allows for separate host

> users for each member of an organization. This allows for more fine grained control

Reviewer: ```suggestion
users for each member of an organization. This provides more fine-grained control
```
To avoid repeating "allows" and hyphenate "fine grained"

of permissions on a given host.

## Prerequisites

(!docs/pages/includes/edition-prereqs-tabs.mdx!)

- A running Teleport Node. See the [Server Access Getting Started Guide](../getting-started.mdx) for  how to add a Node to your Teleport cluster.

> - The following utilities should be available in the PATH for the Teleport SSH Service:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The following utilities should be available in the PATH for the Teleport SSH Service, since it must execute these commands in order to create transient users:
```
Just to make it more explicit why we require these utilities in Teleport's PATH

  - `useradd`
  - `userdel`
  - `usermod`
  - `groupadd`
  - `getent`
  - `visudo`

(!docs/pages/includes/tctl.mdx!)

## Step 1/2. Configure a role

First, create a role with `create_host_user` set to `true`. This will allow users
with this role to have transient host users created at login time.

> This role will allow users to login as `nginxrestarter` on any matching Node. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following role specification will allow users to log in as `nginxrestarter` on any matching Node. The
```
So readers don't accidentally think this is referring to the previous paragraph

Save the below file as `auto-users.yaml`

```yaml
kind: role
version: v5
metadata:
  name: auto-users
spec:
  options:
    # allow automatic creation of users.
    create_host_user: true
  allow:
    logins: [ "nginxrestarter" ]
    # list of host groups the created user will be added to. Any that dont already exist are created.
    host_groups: [ubuntu, nginx, other]
    # list of entries to include in a temporary sudoers file created in /etc/sudoers.d
    host_sudoers: [
       # This line will allow the `nginxrestarter` user to run `systemctl restart nginx.service` as
       # root without requiring a password.
       #
       # sudoers file reference documentation: https://www.sudo.ws/docs/man/1.8.17/sudoers.man/
       "{{internal.logins}} ALL = (root) NOPASSWD: /usr/bin/systemctl restart nginx.service"
    ]
    node_labels:
      'env': 'devel'
```
Create the role:
```code
$ tctl create -f auto-users.yaml
# role 'auto-users' has been created
```

Each value of the `logins` field must conform to the username requirements
of the Linux distribution being used. See [User/Group Name Syntax](https://systemd.io/USER_NAMES/) for requirements in common distributions.

> NOTE: All Teleport user roles matching a node **must** include `create_host_user:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Admonition type="warning">

When Teleport a user accesses a Node, Teleport Server Access checks each of the
user's roles that match the Node. If at least one role matches the Node but does not 
include `create_host_user: true`, automatic user creation will be disabled. Roles that 
do not match the Node will not be checked.

</Admonition>
```
I attempted to make this a bit more explicit. I also placed this paragraph in an Admonition, which is how we highlight information in the docs.

> true` in order to make use of automatic user creation. If all roles do not match,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> user creation will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> If an SSH Node must never allow the automatic creation of host users

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If an SSH Node must never allow the automatic creation of transient Unix users,
```
To be consistent with the phrasing elsewhere in the page

> `disable_create_host_users` can set to `true` in the Teleport configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you can set `disable_create_host_users` to `true` in the Node's Teleport configuration:
```

```yaml
# teleport.yml
teleport:
  nodename: node
ssh_service:
  enabled: true
  # disable automatic host user creation on this node, regardless of role permissions.
  disable_create_host_users: true 
```

> l be disabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    host_groups: [ubuntu, nginx, other]
    # list of entries to include in a temporary sudoers file created in /etc/sudoers.d
    host_sudoers: [
       # This line will allow the `nginxrestarter` user to run `systemctl restart nginx.service` as
       # root without requiring a password.
       #
       # sudoers file reference documentation: https://www.sudo.ws/docs/man/1.8.17/sudoers.man/
       "{{internal.logins}} ALL = (root) NOPASSWD: /usr/bin/systemctl restart nginx.service"
    ]
    node_labels:
      'env': 'devel'
```
Create the role:
```code
$ tctl create -f auto-users.yaml
# role 'auto-users' has been created
```

Each value of the `logins` field must conform to the username requirements
of the Linux distribution being used. See [User/Group Name Syntax](https://systemd.io/USER_NAMES/) for requirements in common distributions.

<Admonition type="warning">

When a Teleport user accesses a Node, Teleport Server Access checks each of the
user's roles that match the Node. If at least one role matches the Node but does not
include `create_host_user: true`, automatic user creation will be disabled. Roles that
do not match the Node will not be checked.

</Admonition>

> If a role sets `host_sudoers` to '*' in the role deny section, the user will have all

Reviewer: It would also be good to have another sentence re: how `host_sudoers` works in `deny` rules. What if the user adds a value other than `"*"`? So far, we only know what this one specific value does.

sudoers entries removed when accessing matching nodes:
```yaml
kind: role
version: v5
metadata:
  name: auto-users
spec:
  options:
    create_host_user: true
  deny:
    host_sudoers: [

>        "*" # ensure that users in this role never have sudoers files created on matching nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       "*" # ensure that users in this role never have sudoers files created on matching Nodes
```

## Step 1/2. Configure a role

First, create a role with `create_host_user` set to `true`. This will allow users
with this role to have transient host users created at login time.

The following role specification will allow users to log in as `nginxrestarter` on
any matching Node. The host user will be created and added to the groups listed in
`host_groups`. They will also be given permission to restart the Nginx service as
root.

Save the file below as `auto-users.yaml`

```yaml
kind: role
version: v5
metadata:
  name: auto-users
spec:
  options:
    # Allow automatic creation of users.
    create_host_user: true
  allow:
    logins: [ "nginxrestarter" ]
    # List of host groups the created user will be added to. Any that don't already exist are created.
    host_groups: [ubuntu, nginx, other]
    # List of entries to include in a temporary sudoers file created in /etc/sudoers.d
    host_sudoers: [
       # This line will allow the `nginxrestarter` user to run
       # `systemctl restart nginx.service` as
       # root without requiring a password.
       #
       # sudoers file reference documentation: https://www.sudo.ws/docs/man/1.8.17/sudoers.man/

>        "{{internal.logins}} ALL = (root) NOPASSWD: /usr/bin/systemctl restart nginx.service"

Reviewer 2: Left a comment here with a suggestion: https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/13663#issuecomment-1170232352.

I think we need to introduce a `{{internal.host_login}}` variable that will expand to the current host username and use it in the guide as well instead of "logins" trait.

---

> title: Configure Teleport to create host users

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Configure Teleport to Create Host Users
```
Using title case for page titles

description: How to configure Teleport to automatically create transient host users.
---

> Teleport's SSH service can be configured to automatically create local Unix users

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Teleport's SSH Service can be configured to automatically create local Unix users
```

upon login.

Host users created by Teleport are transient and will be deleted at the end of an SSH
session.

> 

Reviewer: I think it would be good to add a short paragraph about why transient users are useful, especially in relation to manually adding OS logins or automatically adding them via Teleport's [PAM support](https://goteleport.com/docs/server-access/guides/ssh-pam/#create-local-unix-users-on-login).

## Prerequisites

(!docs/pages/includes/edition-prereqs-tabs.mdx!)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A running Teleport Node. See the [Server Access Getting Started Guide](../getting-started.mdx) for how to add a Node to your Teleport cluster.
```

> The following utilities should be available in the PATH:

Reviewer: I think the utility names should be in code style so it's clearer that these are the names of the binaries you would execute on your system.

Reviewer: Also, does the Teleport SSH Service require these utilities to be in PATH? I don't see examples of running these commands in this guide, so I'm not sure why the Prerequisites section requires them.

- useradd
- userdel
- usermod
- groupadd
- getent
- visudo

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(!docs/pages/includes/tctl.mdx!)
```
We should include the `tctl.mdx` partial since the instructions in this guide use dynamic resources.

> ## Role configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 1/2. Configure a role
```
Per the style guide, we should use the `Step [0-9]+/[0-9]+.` format for H2 headings. See the Getting Started guide for examples: http://goteleport.com/docs/server-access/getting-started/

> First, a role must be created with `create_host_user: true` in order to allow users

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, create a role with `create_host_user` set to `true`. This will allow users
```

> in this role to have host users created for them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with this role to have host users created for them.
```

Reviewer: Also, I think this paragraph needs a sentence about what the Teleport SSH Service will do once a user with this role attempts to log in to a Node. I think "to have host users created for them" can be clearer and more concrete.

> Example:

Reviewer: Let's replace "Example:" with a sentence about what this role allows a user to do, and what will happen when a user with this role attempts to log in to a Node.

```yaml
kind: role
version: v5
metadata:
  name: auto-user-groups
spec:
  options:
    # allow automatic creation of users.
    create_host_user: true
  allow:

>     # username from external attribute.

Reviewer: It might be clearer to use a static list of logins rather than an external trait here so we don't need to explain the use of the IdP-provided template variable.

    logins: [ "{{external.unixLogin}}" ]

>     # list of groups the created user should be added to.

Reviewer: Will the user always be added to these groups on login? I'm not sure what "should" means here.

    groups: [ubuntu, nginx, other]
    # list of entries to include in a temporary sudoers file created in /etc/sudoers.d
    host_sudoers: [

>        "{{internal.logins}} ALL = (root) NOPASSWD: /usr/bin/systemctl restart nginx.service"

Reviewer: I think it would be good to explain this line below the YAML example and add a link to a sudoers file reference. I'm not sure how many prospective users wouldn't be familiar with the sudoers file format, but this would remove some friction from the guide.

    ]
    node_labels:

>       - 'env': 'devel'

Reviewer: I think the value of `node_labels` is a map with string keys, rather than a list.

```

> NOTE: each of the user `logins` entries, should conform to the username requirements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each value of the `logins` field must conform to the username requirements
```

> of the Linux distribution being used. Distribution username requirements: https://systemd.io/USER_NAMES/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the Linux distribution being used. See [User/Group Name Syntax](https://systemd.io/USER_NAMES/) for requirements in common distributions.
```

> NOTE: All Teleport user roles matching a node **must** include `create_host_user: true` in

Reviewer: If I have a user called `myuser` with roles `allow-dev` and `allow-all`, `allow-dev` has an `allow` rule with `node_labels: {'env': 'dev'}`, and `allow-all` has an `allow` rule with `node_labels:{'*':'*'}`, then for a Node with label `env:dev`, does this mean that both `allow-all` and `allow-dev` need `create_host_user: true` to be true for automatic user creation to be enabled? 

What if the user also has a role with `create_host_user: false` that does not match the Node?

order to make use of automatic user creation. If all roles do not match, user creation will be disabled.

> 

Reviewer: I think we should add a command for creating the `role` resource to make this consistent with other step-by-step guides.

> ## Testing host user creation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 2/2. Test host user creation
```

> Host user creation can be used by simply accessing the remote node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you connect to a remote Node via `tsh`, and host user creation is enabled, the Teleport SSH Service will automatically create a user on the host:
```

```sh
$ tsh login
$ tsh ssh unixuser@develnode
```

> What's happening here:

Reviewer: I think we should add example commands to verify that the user and group have been created.

> - The `unixuser` will be created.

Reviewer: Is the Teleport-created user always called `unixuser`? Does this depend on the `tsh ssh` command?

> - The `other` group will be created.

Reviewer: Is the Teleport-created user always added to the `other` group?

> - They will be added to added to the `ubuntu`, `nginx` and `other` groups.

Reviewer: I think this list would be clearer as paragraphs since it's a list of complete sentences that rely on one another for meaning.

- The session will start and the user can interact as normal.

> - At the end of the SSH session the `unixuser` will be deleted.

Reviewer: Is there a way to confirm that the user has been deleted at the end of a session? Also, if a Teleport instance crashes for whatever reason during a session, will the user remain on the system?
